next project:
use Dynamic Factor Analysis (related to MARSS, or Dynamic linear models) to predict nutrient concentrations (nitrate, phosphate, N:P ratio) 
based on monthly average air T, monthly average precip, annual snowpack?

Eric, Mark, and Eli wrote the MARSS package, and they can give me the material for the course.  Tim Cline did something similar already, so he can 
give me his code

the idea with Tim's thing (which daniel just presented) was that they modeled stream temperature as a function of air temp and 
snowmelt, and found that some streams were mainly influenced by air temp, and so fluctuated together through time
while other streams were more controlled by snowmelt temperature, and these varied together on a different cycle.  
Gordon doesn't think they had forward predictions with their model, and they also didn't include a term for reduced snowmelt in the future, which would
presumably make streams fluctuate together even more closely.  

so my goal would be to do the same style of model, but add in that term and predict it forward for stream nutrients, which gordon thinks will also be a function
of precipitation (because N just runs right off the landscape, etc.)

tim cline rewrote MARSS in TMB, so it's wicked fast
the idea is that you have different drivers of some response, like stream temp, and some streams are more heavily influences by one subset and other
	streams are influenced by another.  So one function of temp over time might be a parabola and another a sine wave.  those are the two major components that
	come out of the dfa.  then you can look at each stream independently and ask which trend it looks like.  (this is certainly wrong in some ways.)

it will be the residuals after the climate covariates have been included that i will regress against non-climate factors

May, or may not, doesn’t really matter for your analysis.  The goal is simply to find out:
1) are there trends and are they shared among some subset of rivers?
2) Is there a link to climate?  If so, are the climate-linked systems similar in their watershed morphology, glaciers, vegetation, etc…
3) Does the non-climate trends link to thinks like land use, watershed type, etc….

Things to remember for setting up the model fitting loop:
change response var
#DO NOT comment out first call to tmb script
#set transformation type
#redirect loop output and dataframe output to model_outputs_<var> and model_objects_<var>
#change working directory to: setwd("C:/Users/vlahm/Desktop/stream_nuts_DFA/data")
#include or exclude the imputation bit

#changed the transformer function on home version
#changed section 1.1 a lot




#set up meeting with jessica lundquist

#resend draft email to gordon
develop 4-6 figures for the dfa paper. send to gordon. 

write up methods (long-form even if we go for pnas)
then write up results
see jessica before writing intro (before determining the "pitch")
the pitch is either (if jessica says there's something new here):
	1. climate change affects streams and rivers
	2. not all rivers are the same. some are largely rain/snow/both dominated
	3. theoretical models show that... (might get a clue to what gordon was thinking here if i look at the presentation he sent a while back)
	4. ours is the first (that we know of) empirical demonstration of this
or if there's not:
	more hand-wavey
in either case:
	the sussol/turb stuff is not really necessary, and we can just add a few sentences about it.

set up committee meeting for early spring quarter. 
have full draft ready by then, and full presentation (doesnt have to be polished. can be simply: here's chap 1; here's chap 2)
meeting can be about an hour
get all my paperwork squared away by then. get signatures at the meeting
	may need them to sign off and say "yeah, you're good to finish by this date"

set up thesis defense date. find out when daniel is leaving (probably at the end of may)

project the map so it doesnt look weird


#########--------------###########
after lundquist meeting

NOVELTIES: (this is actually pre-lundquist and unverified)

whereas lisi et al found most snow to melt by early summer in their boreal streams, we see that buffering capacity is at its maximum in Jul and Aug, then the 
"catch-up" period begins and goes through october.

there also seems to be an "anti-buffering" effect from nov through apr

we know snowpack will lessen, snowmelt timing will shift, ratio of snowmelt to rain runoff will decrease,
	but now we can show that the buffering capacity of snowpack will shift, so that peak warming will occur
	earlier for streams that are currently snow-dominated.
	
	
TODO:

##figure##
color points by zone? (rain, rain-on-snow, snow)
group together as plots a,b,c, so that i don't have to show the color.legend three times.
will have to specify in the legend that % watershed ice cover is averaged across 2006, 2011, and taken from x data source
say the significant slopes are at 0.1 level
in the by-month plot, change y axis to just "change in water temp"
plots 1 and 2: slopes, r2s on the plot?
combine 1 and 2?
mention that common trend 2 wasnt significant. absorbed error	
figure out what the y axis represents
consider putting elevation on the x axis and coloring by something else

##literature##
beechie+biehl 2008 biological conservation (gordon's suggestion)
Yearsly and Nijssen are the modelers who are most likely to have done our thing already - backed up the models with data
dan moore does this stuff too
chris franz - aug-sept should be the most important months for buffering??
iris stewart - identified the center of mass shift in the hydrograph
check CIG 2009 (jessica's email) and probably other CIG reports too, to see if this has already been done

##other##
ave watershed slope should be included as a landscape variable?
instead of elevation, use percent of watershed area above 3000 feet, e.g.
compose monthly at best, yearly at worst time series of snowfall (or snow depth by year) and discharge
	nrcs snowtel data
	CIG reports may also link to snow data
	here's what i'll use for snow: snowpack last month-snowpath this month (but only accept positive differences - the rest are assigned 0)
include the loadings regression as corroboration of the effect size regression. the idea is, air temp drives stream temp, but if it doesn't here's why (snowmelt)
	and here's the hidden trend to describe the rivers that dont follow suit.
	
gordon meeting 1/25/17:
	must get monthly breakout to have same y axis as effect size plot. i.e. gotta find coupling by month, or more likely by season
	see if this can be done under the current setup. if not, run separate dfas by season.
	include temperature and total precip as covariates, then
		do post-hoc regression of either:
			1) change in discharge vs. % ice or total area above 3000 ft for rising limb of hydrograph and falling limb/flat period (late summer, early fall)
				make sure this synchs up with cluster analysis of best seasons before using those seasons.
			2) separate regression of change in temp versus % ice or total area above 3000 ft 
			OR
			1) multiple regression including discharge and snow as predictors of temp
		may also have to run a separate dfa to figure out what discharge trends exist
		
########## --------------------------------- ################
interpreting air>disch>water plots:

Quadrants
UR: ^ air, ^ Q, ^ water 
	midland/upland river in winter - warm air makes warm rain which makes warm rivers; snow is not yet contributing to discharge
	upland river in summer/fall - same reason; snow is now depleted
	
UL: ^ air, v Q, ^ water
	lowland river in summer/fall/winter - warm air holds more moisture (so there's less rain), but still makes warm rivers
	
LR: ^ air, ^ Q, v water
	midland/upland river in spring - snow/ice-melt buffering
	upland river in late summer - ice-melt buffering
	
LL: ^ air, v Q, v water
	upland river in late summer - increased moisture holding capacity (less rain) overpowers ice-melt contribution to discharge once that year's snow is gone

x=0: air and Q are uncorrelated; y is always positive under this condition
	lowland river in April - increased temperature means less rain in the lowlands, but more snowmelt
	midland river in May/June - same reason, just shifted higher upslope
	upland river in Jul/Aug/Sep - same, shifted higher
	midland/upland river in fall - increased temperature means less rain in the lowlands, but melting of early snow in some years higher up
	
y=0: air and water are uncorrelated
	any river in Dec/Feb (not Jan) - winter "wants" to achieve a state where warm air makes warm rain which makes warm rivers, 
		but it takes a while to achieve this, and only really acheives it in Jan when water temp is at its minimum and the effect of warm lowland rain is large.
		In dec/feb, this effect is only half achieved, because while there's warm lowland rain, there's also some upland rain that's colder than the rivers.
	midland/upland river in spring - snowmelt buffering: rain warming balanced by snowmelt cooling whenever there's an increase in air temp, and vice-versa
	upland river in fall - in some years, early snowfall will be melted by increases in temperature, creating a buffering effect that will dampen the positive
		air-water correlation that would be seen in other years
		
origin: air has no effect on either Q or water
	midland river in May/June - snowmelt contribution to discharge coincides with reduction in rainfall, which is still enough to counter snowmelt cooling
	midland/upland river in fall - same thing, but with early snowmelt rather than late

slope: the axis of possible states along which a river can exist with respect to the air->Q->water relationship
	more positive = greater positive relationship between water and Q
	more negative = inverse of that

centroid: the average state of the ait->Q->water relationship across rivers

air colder than water in nov-feb in the uplands, warmer int he lowlands.
	winter wants to achieve a statwe where warm air -> warm rain -> warm rivers, but it takes a while to achieve this, and only really acheives it
	it jan when water temp is at its minimum and the effect of lowland rain is large
	in dec/feb, this effect is only half achieved, and there's still some upland rain that's colder than the rivers!
snow falls ~ nov-may
snow melts ~ apr-jun

add significance asterisks
make a combined-month QvT plot to explain the basics.
add mean lines, h and v (separated by point color?)

Mar-Jul: if high air temp corresponds to high discharge, it's because of snowmelt, so it results in low water temp

the glacier fed streams dont really stand out for the air-disch-water effect until may, then they bunch right and everyone else bunches left until august,
at which point they meld back into the crown a bit. they return to the right in oct-nov

January slope: most rivers have a positive air-disch-temp relationship, because warmer air means higher likelihood of rain vs snow, which flows rather 
	than sitting in the mountains. if you're a low elevation stream though (E, M, Z), you were going to get rain no matter what, so instead theres a negative
	correlation, because warm air holds more moisture?

why doesnt the pnw get rain in the summers? look this up.

one graph clearly shows that ice buffering is strong in some months and not others, but the strongest effect is in august. this is because all the lowland streams
	have lost their snow, and it's the glaciers that are keeping the others buffered.
	
	i could bootstrap confidence intervals onto the effect sizes, but not variance exactly.
	
	does buffering run out at a certain point? (aug-sep vs may-jun)
	
	there's high climate sensitivity in the lowland streams. (this is what will befall the upland streams in the absence of glaciers.), but this is affected by
	the previous point
	
	look at what the hidden trends are saying.
	
	interpret the Qvh20_T graphs. do the zeros delineate points where discharge and water pass off some kind of correlation to each other?
	
	extend the line graph out to the whole series and separate discharge/temp by watershed area over 1000
	
DANIEL MEETING =----------------------------------

get down to one shared trend
regress loadings from this against PC1, maybe PC2
see what's driving the PCs

he also wants me to include discharge as a covariate, but i don't think it's possible to achieve what he wants.

see if i can prove that temperature correspondence increases with stream slope (i.e. with increased mixing). 

achnowledge that sublimation may be affecting decreases in snowmelt as well (just mention this in the paper)

maybe two trends if i need them

see if the trend separates RD and SD based on lagged effect of air temp on water temp. the trend would be a wave, and the SD rivers would load strongly on the
month or months immediately following the wave, while the RDs would load right onto the peaks

ZOMG use cross correlation of states and precip/temp
talk to vincent about how he interpreted cross correlation. does a significant ccf value at a particular lag imply correlation at that lag (almost certainly yes)

he also mentioned that air temperature shouldn't affect water temperature when water
is frozen. not sure how/whether to account for this

MIKE MEETING------------------------------------------
include aspect as a watershed feature

remove sites with dams? acknowledge dams some other way? find out where the dams are.
    I think I should just add an outline to the points for the sites downstream of dams

READ: beechie and biehl 2008 (biological conservation)
kathy so and so + julian olden (cited in my paper)
olden paper in print on desk
two emails from mike brett on 3/17

DECISIONS -----------------------------------------
going to use the full 5-trend etc models for the Big5 plot (this should reflect the best information at our disposal)
going to use the more understandable temp model for the other plot (this should reflect our best ability to discern whats going on)